CS4201 Practical 2: Denotational Semantics
==========================================

Due date: Thursday 17th November 2022, 9pm

50% of the coursework grade

**You are expected to have read and understood all the information in this
specification and any accompanying documents at least a week before the
deadline. You must contact the lecturer regarding any queries well in advance
of the deadline.**

Aim
---

This practical will help develop your skills in:

* Lambda Calculus, including beta reduction, alpha conversion and eta-expansion
* Denotational Semantics, including environments and evaluation

Overview
--------

The objective of this practical is to implement a denotational semantics for a
small functional language, "Funl".  The idea is to denote into the semantics,
i.e. translate a Funl program into its equivalent untyped Lambda Calculus form
and then evaluate it, using the reduction rules for Lambda Calculus as
described in the lectures.

There are two parts to this practical:

1. Translating a Funl program into the lambda calculus, following the methods
   described in the Week 8 lectures on denotational semantics.
2. Building a lambda calculus evaluator, to evaluate the semantics to a
   normal form (if one exists).

Effectively, therefore, the goal is to build a reference interpreter for
the Funl language.

Funl
----

Funl is a simple functional language, which is essentially a very cut down
version of Haskell. It has the following core features:

* Recursive functions
* Arithmetic
* Boolean expressions

It also supports some more advanced/more expressive features:

* Lists
* Local function definitions with `where` clauses

The grammar is given in the
ANTLR file `Funl.g`, in the `Practical2/Funl` directory together with Java
files for walking the tree, similar to Practical 1.

Here is a small example Funl program, which calculates a factorial
recursively:

```
    main = apply(fact,10)
    fact n = if n == 0 then 1 else n * apply(fact, (n -1))
```

Functions are defined in the form `<name> <arguments> = <definition>`
where `<arguments>` is a space separated list of argument names. Functions
are applied to arguments using the `apply` construct, and functions of
multiple arguments can be called by chaining `apply`, for example:

```
   main = apply(apply(add, 2), 3)
   add x y = x + y
```

The empty list is written `nil`, adding an element to the front of a list is
written `x :: xs`, where `x` is the element and `xs` is the tail of the list.
`hd xs` returns the first element of a list, and `tl xs` returns all but the
first element of a list.

There are four example programs in `Practical2/Funl/examples`:

* `fact.hs`, the above factorial program
* `fib.hs`, which calculates fibonacci numbers
* `primes.hs`, which calculates prime numbers using the sieve of Eratosthenes
* `primes_where.hs`, which calculates prime numbers using the sieve of Eratosthenes,
  using local function definitions

Lambda calculus
---------------

You should translate Funl programs into the core lambda calculus as
described in lectures, enriched with integer constants and primitive arithmetic
operators.  That is, the lambda calculus should support:

* Variables
* Function application
* Lambda abstraction
* Integer constants and arithmetic operators

Boolean values should be encoded as lambda expressions. You can encode booleans
and their operations as follows:

```
    TRUE  = lambda a. lambda b. a,
    FALSE = lambda a. lambda b. b

    AND   = lambda p. lambda q. p q FALSE,
    OR    = lambda p. lambda q. p TRUE q,
    NOT   = lambda p. lambda a. lambda b. p b a,
    IF    = lambda p. lambda a. lambda b. p a b
```

A similar encoding is possible for lists. Encodings of booleans and
lists as lambda expressions are given in `Practical2/lambda_examples.txt`.

Exercise: as examples (and to convince yourself that this is a correct
encoding of booleans!) try evaluating the following expressions:

```
NOT TRUE
AND TRUE TRUE
IF TRUE 0 1
IF FALSE 0 1
```

Tasks
-----

1. Translate Funl programs into the lambda calculus. The output can be an
   abstract syntax tree representation of the Funl program. The design of
   the syntax tree is left up to you.
2. Build a lambda calculus interpreter that evaluates your lambda calculus
   representation to normal form, using the evaluation rules described in
   lectures. Remember that not all expressions have a normal form, so it may
   not always terminate.

The interpreter should print a trace of the evaluation steps in a readable, but
not necessarily pretty, form, using a syntax of your choice. For example, it
might print:

```
(lambda x . x) (lambda y . y) 94
(lambda y . y) 94
94
```

Feel free to be creative in your design choices. However, make sure you discuss
any choices you make in your report.

Your initial implementation need only include the core features of
Funl:functions, arithmetic and booleans. However, to be able to achieve a grade
higher than 17, you will need to extend your implementation with lists or local
function definitions. (Note that this is not a guarantee of a high grade,
merely a requirement to be able to achieve it!)

Getting started
---------------

You will require ANTLR to be installed. The latest version
`antlr-4.11.1-complete.jar`, which I used to generate the `.java` files,
is available from <https://www.antlr.org/download.html>

You can begin by modifying `FListener.java`, and overriding the methods
similarly to Practical 1. (Please ensure you have correctly set up Java and the
classpath). You can run the initial code as follows:

```
    javac *.java
    java Translate examples/fact.hs
```

This will, at first, merely print `in program` to show that the input has
parsed successfully.

Hints and simplifying assumptions
---------------------------------

1. Functions in Funl have a one-to-one correspondence with the lambda
   calculus. For example, `f x = x + 1` translates to `f = lambda x . x + 1`.
   Function applications (using `apply`) correspond to applications in the
   lambda calculus.
2. For a minimal version, your interpreter need only support numbers. Add
   booleans, recursion and lists once you have successfully implemented this
   first version.
3. You can assume that all the examples that you create or use are already
   correct, contain no type errors, scoping errors, etc. Do not write a
   semantic analyser for this practical, please assume this is already done and
   the examples are correct, well scoped, well typed, etc.
   You can also assume that all the variables in a scope are unique. 
4. Recursion will need to be implemented using the `Y` combinator.
   See the week 4 lectures on lambda calculus.
5. Mutual recursion (e.g. `f` calling `g` and `g` calling `f`) is not allowed.
6. Don't worry about performance: it is more important that the result is
   correct.
7. Assume that all operators are type correct (see also 2). Comparison and
   arithmetic operators work on numbers only. There are no negative numbers.
8. Assume a leftmost outermost reduction order.
9. `where` clauses allow local function definitions to use the enclosing
   scope. For example, if you have:

    ```
        f x = x + y where { y = x + x }
    ```

    this is equivalent to `f x = x + x + x`. As a hint for how to translate
    this to the core lambda calculus, remember that you can introduce new
    names with lambda bindings:
    `f = lambda x . (lambda y . <body of definition of f>) (x + x)`

Deliverables
------------

Your implementation must be in Java, extending the initial code given
in `Practical2/Funl`. Submit, in a `.zip` or `.tgz` file:

* Your code, in a subdirectory `Funl`
* A report

Your report should include at least:

* some test cases and their outputs
* a description of design and implementation choices
* evaluation and critical reflection of your work

Marking
-------

This practical will be marked according to the guidelines at 
<https://info.cs.st-andrews.ac.uk/student-handbook/learning-teaching/feedback.html>.

In particular, I am looking for:

* Good design and understandable code, which is well documented, with major
  design decisions explained.
* A report giving a description of the denotational semantics of your
  translator. You should include in this description how you have constructed
  environments and value domains.
* A report giving a critical analysis of the design and applicability of the
  Funl translator to a range of examples. You are encouraged to come up with
  Funl programs that show interesting behaviours of the system and document
  them in the report. Have fun with it!
* Evidence of a good understanding of lambda calculus and denotational
  semantics.

Also note that: 

* Standard lateness penalties apply as outlined in the student handbook at <https://info.cs.st-andrews.ac.uk/student-handbook/learning-teaching/assessment.html>
* Guidelines for good academic practice are outlined in the student handbook at <https://info.cs.st-andrews.ac.uk/student-handbook/academic/gap.html>
